Did you have an opportunity when you were head of
the department to do any research, or did a member
of your department do any research, or did that
change over the years? Well, I always felt that we
needed research in the department. Of course, it
was in the agricultural experiment station that
Dr. Schmetter had charged. He had several men with
him. In fact, Dr. Turk got started with him. And
we were loaded with teaching hours and with
responsibilities, more or less extension work of
answering letters. And anything on poisonous
plants, I got it. And it made me up poisonous plants
from West Texas that I had never seen. And I'd send
it back to a man who was at Sonora Experimental
Station, a botanist, Mr. Corey, V.L. Corey. And he
would classify and send back to me, the name back to
me. But I got an enormous number of plants to
classify. They thought, well, by George, they
just sent a leaf. And I'd write back, and I'd tell
them I needed a bloom or something like that. But we
did lots of that. I really got into trouble. by
having taken that course with Dr. Pommel. But I
learned something. I learned appreciation of
plants with Dr. Pommel. When I'd notice a
livestock, he'd just grunt. No approval or
disapproval, but he'd see a plant at the same time.
And he says, go over there and get that plant, will
you? And I'd have to crawl through the wire. and get
that plant and take it over to him, and he'd tell me
what that plant was. But any time I'd open my mouth
about livestock, he'd see a plant. And so he got me
botanically minded. I got to appreciating
plants, and I realized to get along with him more
peacefully, why I would need to look at those
plants. But in general, did you have or did any of
your staff members in the department have much
time for research? Did that change over the years?
I guess all of us did a little pilot work of this and
that would get interested. I got interested in
allergic reactions of animals and
it was all from Physiology or Pharmacology. And I
remember having presented a paper at the AVMA in
Chicago on allergic reactions in dogs. I happened
to know Dr. Black, who was in Brown and moved to
Dallas, and he became an allergist up there, and I
went by to see him when I was up there in 34. And he
encouraged me.
So it was before 34, because I had presented that
paper in 33. But I got in contact with him, and he
demonstrated. I think we went up there, and Mrs.
Burns had a brother in Dallas. It was a telephone
company. We went up there, and I went by to see Dr.
Black. And he demonstrated what a positive
reaction was and what a negative was. So he got me
started on the allergy testing. get testing some
dogs. But that was research work of a sort. And so
all of us, I guess, have ever taught in the
department of, perhaps, piddled with things. I
don't know whether
reports in the literature have been made. I recall
that one that I made to the national meeting. I know
Eads got interested in research. He was working on
a degree, though, in
measuring the alveolar air in animals. He had to
devise a certain instrument to put around the
muzzle of the animal, so he'd have to breathe into
this. He did a very good piece of work on that. He
reported that in the journal, I think, probably in
the first volume one, number one of
our research journal. I don't recall the year,
probably in 38, something like that. Did it appear
in the School of Vet and Medicine that there was
more emphasis placed on research over the years,
or less, or did that change? No, more, because then
when research and extension became a part of the
teaching, all in the same department, in colleges
and schools. schools because they didn't become
colleges until 63, until the name was changed from
a college to university.
Each
department increased, of course, the amount of
research work, and when that happened—and that
happened in 48,
when they consolidated But
I remember in the designing of the physiology
department, the building where it exists now, we
were on the third floor. Dr. Bowden was dean, and he
says, the president says, I hate to tell you this,
but says, the president says, design this
building with what you are in
the present status. And I said, I've
been wanting to incorporate some research. He
says, no, you design it as of right now. I said,
you're not on research? So I designed it for
teaching. And I remember contacting the
architect. I said, how much space? on wall work and
microscope space do you allow for students?" He
says, 30 inches. So I prepared for a lab of 32 in each
of those labs. We could handle 64 students, both of
them. But
then I started Some of these Pakistanis, East
Pakistanis came in on us, in addition to 64. And
they take 65, 66, and add them. I said, that's not, I
raised quite a lot of objection to it. And I said, we
prepared for 32. All the departments could absorb
them. But I was too conservative in that planning.
I should have added some. I might have gotten by
with it. Maybe the others did. When did foreign
students start coming to the vet school? Oh, I
don't know whether you'd call a Puerto Rican a
foreign student, but we had one. One member in
Class of 1936 was from Puerto Rico. That was before
it was a state. And that was the first one I recall.
Not from Mexico, because that was a national, but
we had students from Mexico and South America in
the ag course. I've always had some Latinos in my
classes. But in veterinary medicine,
of course when they made that agreement with
Pakistan, East Pakistan,
microbiology, physiology, and parasitology. We
had quite a few graduate students, but we found
quite a few of them inferior. They had not taken
sufficient, they didn't have enough math, didn't
have enough chemistry. And we had a little
difficulty with them, and one or two of them
failed. Was
this in the 30s?
I'd say in the 40s. In the 40s? After the Second
World War? Yes. But
I don't know how many Pakistanis there are now, but
we used to have quite
a few
of them.
Occasionally we'd get one. I got one that was very
good. He'd gotten two degrees, one from the
University of London, and I'd forgotten where the
other one was from, Cambridge or somewhere. But
he didn't mind getting his hands dirty. Some of
them have caste systems, see, and some of that work
that we did was menial to them. And they wanted to
observe. And they'd go from lab group to lab group,
and just wanted to look over somebody's shoulder.
But we'd give them the materials, and we'd had a
pretty hard time enforcing
that each student must pitch in and do his work. But
we finally got pretty good cooperation. But this,
I've
forgotten his, Ahmed, I don't recall now his full
name. But he had two degrees. He took a master's
with me. And then he got his PhD in biochemistry. So
he had four foreign degrees and one from his home.
So he had five degrees. But no one has heard
anything from him. When they cracked down and got
any more intellectuals over there, they tried to
weed them out and assassinate them. I'm afraid he
lost his life. I don't know. But he certainly was an
intelligent person. And with degrees, with all
that many degrees. He was the head of a department.
He went back and headed the department. Oh,
I remember having Shabani as a student. He
finished in agronomy. His father was finance
minister of Iran, and
his father would send him a $10,000 check. Dean
Kyle would of Agriculture would give him
permission to go to Washington, some bank up there
had deposited. And he'd come back, and Dr. Pearson
was head of nutrition, biochemistry and
nutrition, and he says, you know, if we could keep,
and he was the one that talked me into taking him.
You see, when he finished in 40, Got a degree in
agronomy in about 44, 45. He couldn't get home.
Couldn't get to Iran from any direction. And he
stayed over and took a graduate degree. Got him
from agronomy. He went to biochemistry. And then
after the war, after he finished those, he got his
master's. He still couldn't get home. So he went up
to Tennessee, up to Kentucky and worked for a
distillery. And... Schenley Brothers,
Schenley's I think. Schenley and Schenley, I
guess, whatever it's called. And he was on
nutrition, I think, from the standpoint of
byproducts of distillation
by the fiber content. But Shabani, the last I heard
of him was up in the high, in the that are very
responsible. I don't know whether there's a state
or in the national government, but I don't know now
since you may be dead by now. What about tenure? In
the form of student address unknown, so that's
suspicious. Yeah, what about tenure
requirements? Tell me about those. That came back
since I retired. That's... I know— Didn't you have
any tenure requirements back in the 20s? None
whatsoever when I knew
them though. Really?
They were talking about it. I think I remember
going and visiting the American Association of
University Professors when that thing came up,
and some of them, of course, were against it. They
said, we're firing all right, or we are.
They finally got it in, I don't know, perhaps even
before Mr. Rutter came in. I know it was effective
when he was president. Possibly something
before, but it is of comparison to the recent
origin. I would say in the 50s or 60s, Mr. Rutter
came in 60 or 61, I think.
It may have been with Mr. Gilchrist's time, but
I don't know whether it's any different than what
it was before or not.
Okay, let's talk about admission standards to a
college or a school of vet medicine. Back in 1916,
you had to have a high school degree, and those
admission standards increased until 1957 when
you had to have 70 hours of college coursework. Why
did they continually increase? Mainly because
there was more and more knowledge in every
subject. You'd say, well, anatomy, they should
have known, but anatomy has even increased. But
the... Increase in knowledge was astounding in
physiology and pharmacology, more in
physiology, and toxicology, and microbiology.
Oh, microbiology is much improvement in finding
the causes of diseases. These students have a
whole lot more to learn now than we used to because
not too much was known. And that means more hours.
and more help. Do you think the students today that
are admitted into the vet school are better than
the ones that were admitted? I mean, do you think
they're better students, that they know more than
the ones that were admitted back in the 1920s?
Well, they're screened, and they certainly
should know more. High schools are better. And I
hope they know a whole lot more. I know some of us
back in those days may not have gotten in under the
present standards, but I think all that I know of
and all of us were teaching and I knew were A's and
B's. I know I classify myself as an ordinary
student. I've had A's and B's and occasional C, but
we didn't have We didn't have that drive for those
grade points. We didn't have grade points back in
there. We had A, B, and C. And
I think there was, in my time at least, it seems that
our problem was to learn something and not bother
with the grades. I wasn't bothered about grades.
In fact, when I finished in 23, I had a bunch of extra
hours. I had things that I might want to use. I took
concrete construction on my own. And I took herd
book study and animal husbandry on my own. And I
took some Spanish on my own, mainly because I
wanted to take some work Mr. Ingenhuit, he later
got his Ph.D. and went to Columbia. Last I heard of
him, he was teaching in Columbia University. I
think he left here and went to Columbia. He was an
outstanding teacher. He came from Comfort, all
those Germans out there, but he was excellent in
Spanish. And I took some engineering drawing from
Mr. Geist. who was quite an artist, and I took that
on my own. So now you think that the students are
just much more grade-oriented, would you say?
They did become grade. I don't know about right
now. I can't answer for that. But I retired in 67.
But then when they increased admissions, yes,
they were fighting for grade points. Now another
thing that happened on the admission standards I
noticed according to your book is that in 1957 you
needed 70 hours but then they started to decrease
it. You needed 68 hours in 1964 and then in 1975 you
only needed 66 hours. That occurred- Why did they
do that? I don't recall specifically but I know
that was when price was deemed. And they felt that
they had
perhaps too much on there and too much
requirement. And I know there's a change in
attitude of what should be taken as pre-vet
courses and, for example, the increase in math.
Some of us thought that that math should be added.
Finally ended up with calculus. And on graduate
students, if I had a student who came in who looked
superior and I felt would perhaps be headed for
research, I always tried to get them to add math and
also physical chemistry. In my years, I remember
having taken a course at biophysical chemistry at
Iowa State. And I used more of that course than I
think perhaps any course I had. There were twelve
of us in the class. Ten of them were working on their
PhDs. One of them was working on a master's and I was
trying to learn something. And I really worked on
that course. And I didn't realize I learned as much
until I got to using some when I got back. And so I
tried to, we had one of these superior East
Pakistanis, Mia, who got his veterinary, he had a
veterinary degree from Pakistan.
But he was an outstanding student. He was an A
student. And I said, Mia, he picked me up as an
advisor. We didn't have advisors and counselors,
but he'd come around for advice, and I took an
interest in him. And I said, get some mathematics.
He says, all right, and he made an A in calculus, and
he'd come back, and I said, Dr. Jensen talked to him
about physical chemistry. He said, oh, no. She
said, hopefully so. I've heard too much about
that. Well, he had heard about that engineering
course, and he was a bugger. It was... Dr. Jensen
was head of the department at that time, Fred
Jensen. And I knew him, and
I thought that... There was one course in there for
other than chem engineers and then for majors in
chemistry. I think it was for engineers in
general. But it
didn't go as deeply as the one that Mia was thinking
about. And I don't believe Mia took it, but he ended
up Going to California, the man from the
physiology department at the University of
California, I tried to get him here. He wasn't head
of the department, but he was teaching. He came in
my office one day, and I'd heard of him. He's dean at
Florida now. And I said,
you want to? He was talking about how he liked Texas
and everything, and how he liked the veterinary
college. I said, how much do you like it? I said,
I've got a job over there. I'd like to have you. But I
knew something about him. And he said, let me think
about it.
But I had a nice letter from him when he got back.
They added five research projects put on him. He
got a promotion out of it. And so they got a number of
federal grants. That is, I know it was a lump grant,
but that is the time when California was getting a
major part of these federal funds. And they...
We're picking five students. And he said, do you
have one, two? We have two to recommend
physiology. He said, I want to get one from each
school. And I said, he says, now, over in clinic
there, I recommended a man. He's in Washington now
in research. I said, now, what do you want, a cowboy
or do you want a real student? And he says, I said, I
know the student. I said, all right, but I said,
this, and he's Pakistani. But I said, he took, he
followed my advice and has taken math, taken
calculus, and I said, he's strong in math. And...
He has a good chemistry background, and
I said, he'll work for you. He says, now, this is
cattle. And some of them over there knew that I was
recommending him. They said, he's afraid of
cattle. I said, he's not afraid of cattle. I said,
all those cowboys get over there, and they walk
right into him, and he's a little hesitant. But I
said, you give him the responsibility, he'll do
it. So I recommended, he took me on my
recommendation. And I had a nice letter from Mia
thanking me for the recommendation. We went out
there, and I got a letter from this man, and he said,
that's the best graduate student we have. And he
says, now, how about this boy Smith? And I said,
yeah, Smith's all right. Somebody else in the
department. He said, well, I'm going to take two
from me and him. He said, I wanted to get, he took one
from Washington and took one from, I don't know,
Michigan or Illinois or some other. But he, they
tried to spread it out. But he said, I'm going to
take two A&M. But both of them did fine. But he says,
me at the top. He says, at the top of the bunch. And so
I was quite happy about it. And I later asked him, I
said, was he harvested in this cattle? He says, no.
He did, he was perfectly at home around those
cattle. And I said, well, some of them criticized
me because they criticized, they didn't think
Nier would make as good a man as this other one. And
that's why I asked you whether you wanted a cowboy
or a
student. But he was an exception. He and this other
one, I was telling him about having five degrees,
you know, got his matches. But those were
outstanding East Pakistanis. Let's talk about
the overall aim of the vet school. Can you compare
the overall aim of the vet school in the 1920s
versus when you retired in the 1960s? What is the
vet school attempting to accomplish, and how did
that change? Well, in the 20s, of course, I was in
teaching. I was employed as a teacher. and the
research was done by the Dank-Schmitz force. But
looking back on it, I think that would have been
better if we'd had some combination. But I think
that's been a marked improvement. Another thing
is
the improved quality of the employees. In fact,
when I started this history, I had no idea of
putting the degrees on that, but I was astounded at
how many of them had PhDs and how the quality, how
many of them.
Each department had PhDs in it, except, I think,
clinic. I don't think they had any. But, in fact,
now the entire department the dean, the assistant
dean, the two assistant deans, the dean of
instruction, and that is Wally Bay, and the dean of
research, associate deans, they're associate
deans. They're all PhDs in the dean's office. And
at one time, there were none. When Price had it,
there were none in there. Except when Meyer came
in, Meyer was a PhD. as the Associate Dean of
Research. I don't recall the exact year he
retired. So do you see that as an improvement? Yes,
I do. I think the quality...
And these men are through with their schoolwork,
and most of them are interested in research. And
that's improved a great deal. So the aim has
shifted away then toward research and away from
just training practitioners then? Would you say
that? No, I think that our product is primarily a
practitioner. Still today? Yes, I think so. Yes,
absolutely. In fact, most of them are doing small
animal practice. I'd like to see more of them in
large animal practice. But a lot of them go into
general practice to take care of all. See, in small
communities, they're forced into it, and some of
them by choice. That's why some of them go to small
communities. But if they want to go in for the
money, so to speak, I'd like to think they're in the
minority. But if they go into a city, why, they are
small animal practitioners. like Houston and
Dallas. But some of them, the edges of the cities
are large animal practice. Some of them in the
cities go out and dairy practice.